[Music]
hello and welcome to the BBC good food
podcast with Tom courage I'm Orlando and
we're here today to talk about citing
ingredients cooking techniques and
general kitchen chat plus we have an
original Tom carriage recipe for you to
try out at home whether you're a
beginner or a budding chef welcome to
the first ever BBC good food podcast
with Tom carriage I'm Orlando Marin and
today Tom and I are joined by food
writer
Rosie Birkett and we are talking about
roasts Oh I've mentioned that word I can
almost smell the aromas drifting in from
the oven
Tom roasts where do you stand on a
Sunday roast I know the best thing ever
I mean is there anything better than
that and everybody's mum does the best
roast that my mum is not know that's the
argument it's one of those things as
childhood memories they're the big thing
that is the family meal that you sit
down with because you know everyone has
busy lives ever like midweek not many
people get to sit down as a family so
much is going on but actually on a
Sunday there is a time where people have
got time to cook and you remember as a
kid that you know you sit there and you
have Sunday lunch and it's amazing
roasts are just the bet it's the
occasion as well as the food isn't it
then there is the food and there is
something about the fact it's cooking
for an hour or two and filling the house
with delicious aromas and someone's in
the kitchen making making all the bits
to go with it it's just a very good
comforting feeling isn't it I actually
think that roasts are the reason that
I'm sitting here right now oh my we will
argue about this but my mum does make
the best roast just to clarify and every
every Sunday so every single Sunday
through childhood we had them and my dad
worked in London during the week so we
didn't see him very much
and then on a Sunday we'd all get
together and have these roasts and it
without fail every single Sunday even in
the hottest hottest heat waves and there
was such a huge formative part of my
childhood
helping mum in the kitchen I was her
sous-chef I really wanted to be there I
wanted to know exactly what she was
doing she wouldn't she's control freak
in the kitchen so that I was limited to
very menial tasks but I definitely
couldn't get enough of watching and
seeing what was going on and the whole
ceremony of it and the sitting with all
the family and spending time together it
really it really was the thing that got
me into food we're going to talk about
gravy a bit later on because gravy is a
very exciting subject and we've had lots
of instagramers telling us that they
want our gravy tips but my mom used to
let me make the gravy so I think that's
how I started cooking and she had a
rather rickety little a roasting pan all
bent on the bottom which went on the hob
and then a kind of weird
flat whisk thing that you went round
with and it was very important I should
think I made terrible gravy but then my
mom speaking of gravy my mum has
basically the same gravy that she made
in 1984 she's still using so a bit like
how you use like sourdough starter to
make every loaf of bread my mum keeps a
bit of gravy from every roast and it's
in like a flora tub in the freezer and
she's got all these Tupperware tubs from
the freezer labelled with the different
gravies and she's got a little bit from
each one and they just go on forever
and she won't give me any she's like no
I need that and it's like the
neverending gravy story it's the sort of
glass to beyond gone mad isn't it it's
distillation of all those wonderful
roasts over the years yeah scientists
would make of that they've probably
closed the ice down I gotta be honest in
Miami together you might be like seen
from et you know when they just it might
it might be like that I mean gravy from
1984 it's not so I'm not roasting feels
very British is do other nations do it
Tom or is it is it something that we
will sell out unlike a lot of things
because where was the laughingstock of
the culinary world French call us the
roast beef like it is something that we
do we do incredibly well and we have got
the idea of roasting meats and we're
very good at doing roast beef you know
it's in particular is something that
we're well-known for doing and it you
know roast beef Yorkshire pudding is
famous the world over side fishing
it's a we our beef is some of the best
in the world if not the best in the
world and then roasting it properly and
serving it with the Yorkshire pudding
which is delicious and then making the
right gravy with it and it is one of
those dishes its iconic and because it's
it's quite simple to do and the veg
garnishes are quite simple it's all
everything about it is about the produce
and allowing it to sing for itself it
isn't unnecessarily an over complicated
dish but yet other nations do do it very
well the French - I mean I would look at
the French the way that they slow cooked
lamb the way that they roast like a
shoulder of lamb on top of Boulanger
potatoes and they roast that beautifully
and that's a single dish on its own
that's cooked for five or six hours on a
low temperature they do it slightly
differently but yet other nations do
roast meat they do the delicious
rotisserie chickens as well the plain
roast just slapped into the oven with a
bit of good dripping is curiously it
feels very British because it's plain
and simple and honest isn't it yeah but
it does happen in in every other if you
think of some of the most fantastic
Greek cooking is very simple dishes that
are just chucked in the oven with some
dry herbs over the top seasoned and
roasted and then the vegetables that's
over there all the vegetables that are
native to that country the things that
work really well whether these
aubergines and courgettes or tomatoes or
whatever else depending on where you are
in this country our roast is good
because we go right as roast potatoes
carrots turnips parsnips because
essentially I mean we're in northern
European country it's cold that most
nine months of the year we have to wear
a jumper yeah pretty good at root
vegetables it's so you know yeah that's
why it suits us and that's what we do
and it is something that is inherently
British you wouldn't expect to go to
Greece in the middle of August and have
roast beef of Yorkshire pudding and
carrots would you but you would go and
have a slow so cooked lamb covered in
beautiful dried oregano and served with
some amazing beautiful a Greek salad on
the side it's still a roast it's just
native of that area yeah like the
Italians with their porchetta
yes you know they'll butcher a pig and
then they'll use that part of the pig
which is the loin and the belly yeah
wrapped rolled with fennel seeds and
Oregon oh and chilly and delicious and
then slow slow slow roasted probably in
a wood oven and I think that what other
countries tend to do say perhaps in
Spain they do a lot of roasting over
fire don't they and roasting in wood
ovens and using kind of direct heat from
charcoal or burning logs and roasting
like whole suckling which without their
and their own distinctive flavor to the
thing in the meat but the it's got a
kind of good rhythm to it a roast meal
because you you put it in the oven and
then you get this it's not an
intermission but you get an hour or
something to do the accompaniment which
is really well-organized it's very
practical isn't it works for everyone
doesn't yeah it's great I mean it is
fantastic
I mean we talk about it as childhood
memories I remember my Sunday lunches so
I mean I grew up as a single-parent
family my mum there wasn't much money
and it's something I've talked about
before but we used to have so we
couldn't have didn't have enough cash to
buy chickens or joints of meat or she
used to roast kind of like a sausage
meat roll used to be able to buy like a
sausage meat in like a kilo wrapper and
she'd get that and she would roast that
as the joint but she would do everything
else the roast potatoes the carrots the
broccoli the peas the cauliflower cheese
the whatever else that goes with it she
would cook all of the economy so uh we
as kids never saw this as being the
roast had actually been there wasn't
anything about not having any money or
this being a cheap thing it was still
there's a thing that's been roasted in
the middle of the table and we've got
all the veg and so it was always this it
was a great day of excitement on Sunday
mornings I remember it would always go
off to rugby rugby training or a game on
the Sunday morning and come back and
walk into the house and the smell of a
roast is so wonderful yeah there's
nothing better than on a cold winter's
day walking into the house after
somebody's been cooking the ever so long
just overwhelmingly like I am hungry now
yeah the windows all steamed up yeah
we've got a great recipe coming up at
Tom Kerry's recipe on the good food
website for a pot roast chicken but
before we do that we've got lots of
other things to talk about but let's
start off with pork yeah and do you have
a favorite cut of pork for roasting Tom
I mean I have to be honest like pork is
just like the dream it's amazing who
doesn't like cracking oh social medias
cumbers urk about cracking they all want
though about crackling and they all love
crackling oh I mean the best way to do
it so pork loin for me is amazing it's
beautiful but it hasn't got that higher
fat content so if you want to get good
crackling on it you normally have to
cook things for longer but that what
that means is you will quite often end
up with a pork loin being overcooked
because it can go bit both the wood II
can't it and a bit of it exactly so what
I would do I'm gonna do port I mean I
for roasting I would always go for a
pork belly into a slow roast and you can
either brine it first or to get a great
crackling right you buy the best pot you
can get very similar to the chicken
thing you got to buy amazing port that
you can afford pork belly and then you
on a Saturday evening for your Sunday
don't you take it out the fridge put it
on a cake right you stick it in the sink
you boil a kettle you pour boiling water
all over the top of that's the skinny
side the inside scores at that point now
don't worry about the whole school room
thing it doesn't matter yeah you don't
worry about it and just pour it all over
the top and it scolds the top and dries
ask it like it will it will kind of
shrink a little bit like curve up just a
little bit and changes color from that
kind of like light translucent pink to
being slightly whiter and harder from
where it has just been scolded then Pat
it dry with kitchen towel and then leave
it on that cake rack out out overnight
okay don't let it sort of out to reach
at a dog right on the side leave it out
overnight so then when you come down in
the morning it's dry okay it's room
temperature and it's dry you die okay
not clingfilm grow nothing on that then
you put it into a into the oven low
temperature around about 150 160 and you
cook it for around about three and a
half hours all right and then you will
see it begins to crisp and go lovely and
crunchy and crispy okay and then you
turn the oven up to about 220 for the
last 45 minutes and watch it and you'll
get this amazing incredible craft and it
goes that Brit exactly it goes like
glass it's about drying it out can you
do that under the grill it needs to be
in the oven you need
in the oven if you grill it's too much
of a direct temperature that I used to
assist a Vietnamese chef call you and
Lou and she made the most incredible
Vietnamese pork belly and her trick is
to is in a similar way to what tom was
saying poached the belly first in a in a
pan with a little bit of bicarbonate of
soda and that did the same thing to the
skin dried it out and you would poach it
in that and then let it dry and then
again you're getting missing let it dry
overnight again but the by carp does
something to to the skin that really
dries it out and makes for this
incredible shattering crackling I've
heard of people drying out ducks with
them hairdryers to do that the Chinese
thing with them if you ever resorted to
a hairdryer in your kitchen
Rosie I haven't no although I have been
on food styling shoots where I've used a
heat gun to puff the skin up on a on a
roast turkey but that's a different
story okay yeah it's a it's a nice way
of doing it you dry it first and then
that and that's I mean I'm just sure I'm
sure
is this an Instagram this is on my
Instagram feed and it is of crackling
that's been cooked exactly the same way
that I just talked about but the pork
belly's soft and juicy and that's why
pork belly is amazing for slow roasting
because it has that higher fat content
and still stays nice and juiciness but
it's the perfect balance it's and it's
cheaper yeah yeah it is they're gonna
catch on to this the fact is cheap run
they could put the price up of pork
belly our voices down really shouldn't
we so they don't know no can we move on
to lamb where what do you like to roast
shoulder shoulder slow roast shoulder
like to pierce it loads and loads and
loads and puts cloves of garlic inside
loads of holes a bit
stick it in the oven again this is
another one and slow slow roasting and
it so that you can fork it it's got to
be on the bone as well and so by the end
of it you can just basically flake it
off and
creating a little pace at the end with
some salted anchovies and some garlic
and some chili and just smearing it all
over the top it's amazing it's a very
continental wave cook is that all you
smear that smear is done after after
it's over by ten minutes before the end
of run just give it a nice little coat
like salted anchovies and garlic and
some anchovies in sometimes the longer
garden so it's very odd that just goes
beautifully lamb with anchovies and you
don't put anchovy haters don't know
there there's no it's not fishy at all
it's this wonderful salty savory flavor
that's fantastic with it and Sherry's
are so good with with meat in general I
think my new thing is anchovy mayor
actually which is smashing up some
really good like oil preserved anchovies
and then just stirring through some
really good shop bought Mayo and having
it on like poached eggs having it on
beef sandwich you know it's really
delicious tasty lap but lamb is one
because it's got a high fat content
the lamb is beautifully roasted it's
slow-cooked I mean yes you could do
racks of lamb you can do but I quite
like a leg like a new season leg of lamb
delicious and it may be sort of do a
light cure overnight so do a cure with
salt and sugar equal parts rub it all
over the lamb maybe put some rosemary
and some garlic in there and then leave
it in the fridge and that will draw out
some of the moisture concentrate the
flavor of the leg and then that's a
quicker roast in a hot oven really good
in a kind of wood oven that would be for
those slow roasts I think what shoulder
is definitely better because it's Fatiha
and sometimes with it the leg can go a
bit dry and fibrous can't it if it's
slow roasting it and roast in
particularly for for home cooked but
even you know me on a day off on a
Sunday the last thing I want to do is
worrying about core temperatures of
making sure that some of there's nice
and medium or medium rare and taken out
and rest in time it's actually just a
case of sticking in the oven and
enjoying the day and that's where lamb
and pork does so well with that beef
it's a little bit different and where
you can rack of lamb or even a leg you
still want a little bit pink you know or
lamb rubs you still need to be you need
keep a conscious eye of what you're
doing so that you can still have it nice
and pink because those cuts if they're
over
they are a little bit drying not they
haven't got quite got the fat content
so would you tend check that with a
digital thermometer if you need to
yeah digital thermometer is probably the
only way without otherwise you've got to
cut into it to see what what's going on
in the middle haven't you I well you can
use a cake skewer you can use the
endpoint of a knife and then pull it out
and then you you test it on the bottom
of your lip and if it's just above blood
temperature take it and then and leave
it to rest oh that's a really good tip
oh I think that would require more
confidence than I've got I wouldn't I
wouldn't dare do that
no is it about blood temperature I don't
know what's in my blood temperature it's
colder if it was cold on you onion okay
you know or if it feels I mean if it's a
lot hotter this tulip then basically
your lambs over case if it is a case of
just so you put the skin into the center
of the meat and then you try out on your
bottle if it's just above blood
temperature then you take out but you
got the rest in process is so important
you that residual heat of light but when
you're cooking things that you want to
be nice and paint you've got to cook
them in a high oven not a low oven you
need a high heat that kind of attacks
that joint straightaway and starts
cooking it gives it lovely roasted
flavor on the outside and then really it
and then when you can take it out then
that residual heat continues to permeate
right through to the middle because if
you've done it on to lower heat it's not
hot enough to continue cooking and still
stay cold in the middle this is what I
mean about the confidence of it this is
why pork better pork belly down shoulder
but it's always better to err on the
side of under when you're doing like you
say when you're doing a roast in a hot
oven because you can't go back once
you've overcooked it whereas whereas it
will cook on when you rest it yeah if
you rest it for long enough as long as
it's been hot to the core initially and
you've got that temperature going
through it take it out rest it whereas
if you've overcooked it there's no going
back something I've always wondered is
if you're slow roasting something like
the pork belly is the resting time as
important as if you're roasting it too
pink in the middle
no not as is important but it's still
good to rest it because it just relaxes
everything it just becomes it's just
easier to work with
flavor-wise is it's settled a bit more
it's not as hot
everything's just relaxed the fibrous
muscle content of the piece of the joint
of me has just become a little bit more
just everything about it resting is
resting this group and we're talking 20
minutes really for a normal normal size
at least join 20 to 30 frightened of it
going cold do we cover it with foil baby
crackling the oven turn the oven off
right yeah it for 20 minutes half an
hour then put it back into the oven that
the oven sat with that residual heat by
that time has gone from 220 down to down
to 50 or 60 and it will just sit there
and stay warm we're consciously going
everything should be hot well everything
shouldn't be hot everything should be
the temperature that it should be to
taste the best yeah
which isn't hot it's actually around
about 55 60 degrees centigrade which is
just lovely that's where you want it
do you remember what restaurants were
you they used to bring out the plate and
the plate was like white hot ladies they
don't touch don't go near the plate
because it was so hot people don't do
that now nowadays and you don't go
desert with hot plates in your
restaurants no plates have gotta be warm
place have got to be warm because
otherwise food goes cold but yeah you
want the plate to be the right
temperature you don't want it to be so
hot that when you pour sauce on it it
starts bubbling but yeah I think also
when you're doing us a roast to have hot
plates is good because as we say if you
have rested the meat and it maybe it's
not you know it's not as hot as it could
have been having it on a hot plate we'll
bring that up again and hot gravy is
definitely definitely hot gravy I'm can
we talk about beef then which joint of
beef is your favorite to roast Tom
ribeye for me is my favorite and that is
one that you got to look off and that's
the one with a bone in it so you can get
you can get full rib of beef the same
sort of thing there is roasted joint
with big
ribs on it you can get it on the bone or
you can get the rib eye roll where it's
taken off and just tied but it has that
beautiful kind of top cap of it and then
it's got a little lie of fat that runs
through it and then
the eye of the meat is well which is
absolutely delicious so as you slice so
I could ribeye steak put a whole joint
of it and that's fantastic because of
the fat it's kind of self-basting in the
sense yeah and beautiful flavor it
tastes fantastic it's a great cut of
meat but that is one that you've got to
look after that is one that you don't
want to overcook you got it you got to
take your time and look after it so
that's a proper special occasion
concentration on the kitchen that's not
drinking on the job that's not like
disappearing and walking the dogs or
your mind disappearing and watching a
football right this is you are you're
doing a proper job of cooking then
you've spent a lot of money on a liver
beef you do not want to mess it up
still to come on BBC good foods podcast
with Tom carriage yeah is that what
white white creamed yeah made with
onions yeah lots and lots of onions by
normal normal onions they do the onions
in butter which actually my mom used to
do elites as well oh yeah and then
you're getting into cheese elite
territory alright no one no favorite
yeah see this is what votes are amazing
they work with so many different things
and those are condiments are so special
because they are it spawn layer upon
layer upon layer of flavor and if the
French lava is for having apples apple
sauce with pork I mean come on that's a
nation of people that eat horse and
snails got stop laughing
[Laughter]
[Music]
now the accompaniments that we serve the
French laugh because they say that we
always had jam with our meat because we
do have these funny things like apple
sauce and cranberry sauce and things
like that are you keen on the bits and
pieces that go with puddings been
mentioned a few times I take it that we
wanted all your pudding
absolutely I'm married to York Sherman
pudding but yeah I just think Yorkshire
puddings all the accompaniment or the
accompaniments for roasts are half the
fun tonight I think it's like what tom
was saying earlier about your roast with
with your mom when you're a child
actually for me it's as much about the
crispy bits and the potatoes and the
cauliflower cheese and the Yorkshire
puddings and the stuffing and the gravy
then is about the meat itself or the
roast and do you like red sauce
delicious other than Christmas really
underneath the chicken on the plate
underneath under sauce is that what
white white creamed yeah made with
onions yeah lots and lots of onions by
normal normal onions so you do the
onions in butter would you my mum used
to do leaks as well as oh man yeah and
then you're getting into
cheesy leek territory favorite yeah see
this is what most are amazing
they work with so many different things
and those accompaniment SAR so special
because they are its pond layer upon
layer upon layer of flavor and if the
French lava is for having apples
applesauce with pork I mean come on
that's a nation of people they eat horse
and snails
stop laughing parsnips are something
that I've never got on with I had bad
childhood experiences with parsnips but
everyone else seems to mine past
I love parsnips they're delicious
experience yeah well actually dates back
to sweet I'm afraid so anything in that
sweet family I have problems with it
they we've kind of force-fed them at
school and it was extremely nasty it's
always school yeah yeah
when people are fussy about food I find
most of the time you can track that back
to school dinners I was wounded by one
particular school where am I you're
gonna say wounded by one particular part
where the food was so disgusting that my
mother couldn't believe the tales that
we took home and one day she turned up
my mother at school during lunch and
swept into the dining hall just see what
we were eating Jamie Oliver she did and
we were eating little bits strips of
flaky white overcooked fish with what we
call piggy sauce which was this pink
sauce on it and she's and those much
mushy pea things and my pink wouldn't no
one ever found out and my mother Rose
her full height she wasn't very tall and
said my children are not used to eating
that sort of food and they won't be
eating anymore and my brother and I got
exemption my darling mother wasn't that
fantastic job she did there and so ok we
went hungry but that was anything was
better than fishing piggy sauce I'm
sorry I have digressed but to return to
the past nibs I think you should explain
how to do positives for those that do
like them even though I have said that I
won't be enjoying them well I tend to
just parboil them very briefly
not for long at all but just to take the
edge off them and then into similar way
as I do roast potatoes into hot fats I
quite like to add later on when they've
been roasting for a while add a bit of
honey something
paint that on or just just shake them
around and I'd probably just spoon some
in and then toss them around in it and
it would melt in the residual heat from
the tray I quite like a pinch of cumin
seeds on my parsnips I think that works
really really really well and one thing
that have been experimenting with that I
love is to when I've been poaching
rhubarb and I have a bit of the rhubarb
syrup left over the pink the bright pink
don't know how you're gonna feel about
this time the bright pink rhubarb sir
but that tossed on the parsnips is
amazing because it gives that kind of
sour sweet sherbert e rhubarb nurse
glaze to the to the parsnips which have
got that amazing kind of earthy peppery
flavor I mean that sounds fantastic I
gotta be honest I'm a big fan of
parsnips I think they're lovely the only
thing that I would do I don't know quite
how rosy cuts her passage but I don't I
will serve them whole I'll just peel
them and roast them whole because
they've got such a high sugar content in
them and they break down there quite
starchy they break down quite quickly
not like a potato they don't take us
long to cook so I like to roast them
whole so that there is sometimes people
come in half and take the cores a bit if
let's say no if they're not that big
roast them at peel em and roast them
whole and they're delicious the rhubarb
thing I mean actually I could see where
that's going I we do a lot of things
with rhubarb and rhubarb purees apple
replacement so where you have pork with
apple sauce we do a lot of it with
rhubarb rhubarb and pork go so so well
together so so yeah I'm up for rhubarb
with roasts I mean that I like the idea
of that with the Parsons but I would do
that I would just do them home and it
pretty much exactly the same as Rosie
you need quite small ones and don't you
because sometimes you get a rhubarb and
it's massive yeah and then you need to
cut it into quarters but I like to keep
the whole length of it because they look
really nice don't they when you can see
the kind of shape of the rhubarb
probably not for you one day we had
someone on Instagram asking us having a
prep they've got a problem with the
parsnips is that they're not quite sure
how to get them nice and soft without
going dry and crispy because they've got
that point at the end does go a bit
drier and crispier than the the thick a
bit doesn't it so is that just the
nature of a parsnip to be two things at
once because it's got two ends
you can end up with a crispy or end and
a softer that's probably the pleasure
get crispy pointy bit and a softer back
end yeah
just keep an eye on them and turn them
and do you aim for something green on
the plate as well for your roasts roses
Rose always says Rosie what would you do
then oh well what you've got on the
allotment well it depends what's in
season yeah if it's some with a pork I
like a kind of a nice Brassica so a
lovely kale we've got so much kale in
the allotment at the moment so a nice
kale maybe a cavallo narrow is really
really nice with pork and with lamb
actually or peas and broad beans when
peas and broad beans are in season
absolutely delicious with lamb and
chicken and runner beans kicking myself
that haven't planted any one of beans
this year but Ronna beans are such such
a nice accompaniment with a roast my mum
you have this she still got it it's an
implement have you seen this it's a
stringer and it's kind of like a little
square with metal prongs and have been
framed and the string and the string go
off at the thigh into these kind of
spaghetti yeah and then these and then
you blanch them and then those butter
black pepper salt really nice and this
smells so lovely fresh runner beans does
slice that lovely grassy smell that they
haven't I love the raw as well heaven oh
really like not on a roast but when I'm
preparing them just a constable now
we're going to talk gravy in just a
moment but I'm feeling a bit peckish so
how would you feel like a little fort
full of pot roast chicken Tom Kerry's
recipe for pot roast level con roast I
love a part it's kind of like um the
idea of a pot roast is a play on a
classic French dish like Pato furnace
that crossover between a roast and a
casserole so you kind of get everything
in it you get the roast bird and the
chicken work so well when you you when
you pot roast it because it helps to
steam it and and so it it keeps it
moister it keeps the flavors a little
bit more you creates its own gravy
that's so tender doesn't it that's every
last morsel of chicken asst jana ninis
you can enjoy exactly that and also you
haven't really got to worry about
overcooking it because the thing about
birds is the fact that
you want the legs to be cooked properly
so that you can take the meat off the
bone quite nicely but at the same point
when that happens quite often the breast
gets overcooked but this way because the
breast is getting steamed or and poached
it's okay if it's overcooked a little
bit because it's all about the flavor
again everything together but I'm got to
stop talking out because we're gonna
take this lid off yeah
golden golden and steamy on the top
lovely and look at that skin we like the
skin of a chicken tender and used a
spoon to carve it that's and you get all
that lovely stalkers last so you've got
you know you might think that by pot
roasting something it you get a rather
pay or kind of squishy result but this
is a gorgeous golden thing isn't it with
lovely skin yeah lovely brown skin
that's because you haven't got it all
completely submerged in the stock yeah I
was going to ask you about this because
the recipe specifies a particular amount
of wine and water and it says to pour
that into the casserole but if you've
got a different sized casserole if you
had a very small chicken shape one it
would cover it if you have a broader one
it's not going to so are we aiming for a
particular depth do you think ideal yeah
you want about an inch or two of the
chicken sticking out over the top so
what that happens that gets crispy and
crunchy on the top but you also get it
kind of steams it as well from the
middle so it's always gonna cook and it
tastes fantastic but you do want to get
a bit of texture but even if it covers
it I wouldn't worry too much because you
can always take the chicken skin off and
you know it's all about the flavors in
the bottom you know it's perfect so
that's what I want to do when I go home
and I might not have the same size pot
so I know how to recreate that exactly
so about an inch or two that would be
what 3 to 6 centimeters are poking out
over the top and if you're doing brazing
of course it's a bit different because
it's 1/3 deep isn't it you take if a
brazing something you do to one third of
the piece of meat depth so this is quite
a lot of liquor
it this is quite a lot liquid but it
creates his own stock so you can then
pass that off after you use that to make
soups you can make that you use it for
anything you can use it from and it's a
double stock isn't it cuz you use stock
in there so it's chicken cooked in
chicken stock so you go okay so now you
got double chicken stock which makes it
even more amazing Oh Rosie your mother
would like that should put some in the
freezer good there's a lot of chomping
sounds going on which is a very good
noise but I do want to talk about gravy
now because we all love gravy first a
quick question thick or thin thin Tom I
mean not thin but not claggy something
like this pot roast this is about it
being stocky and loose and like a
Potiphar however if you've done a roast
chicken on its own or a beef you want
the graving to actually be a little bit
thicker so it coats so you can you can
dip things in it so you can coat over a
potato so so it's it's alright so when
you move it from those clear gravies
which don't seem to be gravies at all
where you know it rolls around on the
plate no I do tend to thicken gravies
with a little how do you make your gravy
with with flour so do you do what my
mother did get the roasting tin yeah
absolutely so I'd roast that whatever
I'm roasting I'd roast it probably on
maybe it depends what's the season but
usually an onion a carrot a bit of
celery perhaps a bit of fennel depending
on what it is I'd roast the joint on
there and then once I move the the joint
to rest I'd get the tray take the veg
out put the roasting tray over the heat
put a little maybe if there was a lot of
fat like if it was something like a pork
belly I'd skim off some of the fact I
don't want a greasy gravy but you do
need some fat to make the roux so then
I'd scatter flour into the tray and then
this is just how my mom made it and how
I make it and then just use the back of
a spoon to break
into the fat and into the crusty bits
that have formed where from the
caramelization really tasty the crusty
bits are really important on their
moment then I get some stock in there
and again having stock in the freezer is
but it like this for example if you had
this stock in 1984 the stock goes in and
then probably a slush of something wine
or if it's poultry I love a bit of
sherry in there and then cook it until
it's and keep tasting it salt it maybe a
little bit of extra acid in the form of
vinegar or lemon but for me it needs to
be thicker than you know then a liquid
that hasn't been thickened but it can't
be too thick and like gloopy because
that just the only the only thing that I
would do different is probably use a
whisk rather than the back of the spoon
just to make sure that you're really
beating out all of those lumps and I'd
pass it through a sieve at the end just
to just to make sure that you got all
the lumps and bumps out of it and then
if you need to you can just put a little
knob of butter and whisk that in as well
and then in terms of the alcohol thing
I'd always put that in pretty much last
so that you get that that kick of like
raw flavor that you get from alcohol
you're not looking necessarily for the
taste of alcohol but you're looking for
what that a splash of red wine or a big
splash of sherry brings it brings that a
rawness of this flavor that enhances
that taste it brings it to life so so
exactly the same the flour in the tray
and a good stir in the pan and then at
the stock a little bit of buzz doesn't
it just at the end you know sometimes
sometimes we must talk about how to
correct the flavor of a sauce because
Tom you'll know exactly how to add a
little bit of this and get the thing
really singing and dancing but that
unfortunately is for another day because
that's all we've got time for Rosie
today in honor of my mom who I feel like
I've really thrown under the bus here
always well I know it's hard to save any
gravy that's why I should always make
loads of it because it's it for me it
goes all over everything but keep a bit
of the gravy freeze it and then add it
to the next one gravy into the gravy
that is just gonna boost the flavor of
the gravy so do try and do
in honor of Chris eBay that's great
thank you very much and we must carry on
eating this chicken thank you my
pleasure thank you for listening to
today's show you'll find the recipe and
thousands more on BBC good food comm if
you have a minute we'd love to hear from
you on Twitter Facebook or Instagram at
BBC good food
[Music]